>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
"Gaiam Inspirations,"
and we're broadcasting
from the Sounds True Wake
Up Festival in the
beautiful Rockies
surrounding Estes
Park in Colorado.
So most of our greatest
joys and sorrows
happen with our
relationships with others.
Our days are basically a dance
between relating with others
and relating back to ourselves.
If this consumes
most of our day,
wouldn't it be great
if you could really
learn to guide your mind
to forgiveness and healing
and find a greater happiness
and connection with others?
Well, that's what we're
talking about today
with neuropsychologist
Rick Hansen.
He teaches how brain science,
practical psychology,
and Buddhist
meditation practices
are able to help us achieve
greater intimacy with ourselves
and in our relationships.
Welcome.
>>RICK HANSON: It's great
to be here, Lisa-- really.
>>LISA: This is going to
be so fun, because we're
going to just connect with
our brain chemistry today.
>>HANSON: Oh!
>>LISA: So let's talk
about relationships.
So, every single day, we're
relating with others-- people
in lines and cars when we
drive, with our loved ones.
How do you not carry the baggage
over into the relationships
to affect?
How do you start new every day,
I think is what I'm asking?
>>HANSON: Wow.
That's a great question.
Well, I think for one, it's
natural to not start new.
In other words, we're designed
to learn from our experiences.
And it would be, in a way,
odd to wake up and roll
over and go, who
are you, anyway?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HANSON: Right?
There would be a little
trouble with that.
So I think sometimes
people feel bad about still
being affected by things.
But it's natural to
be affected by things.
The Buddha had a nice
metaphor for that-- the first
and the second dart.
The first dart is what affects
us in the first place--
physically and emotionally.
OK.
But then we had
second, third, fourth,
and fifth darts that
we throw ourselves.
And sometimes those second,
third, fourth, or fifth darts,
especially for people who
have done some inner work,
is that they feel bad
about feeling bad.
So step one is to let go of
that one as much as possible.
>>LISA: We throw the darts
back or more darts get--
>>HANSON: At ourselves.
>>LISA: At ourselves.
>>HANSON: We throw
them at ourselves.
We criticize ourselves.
Why am I still irritated with
my partner over that thing?
Oh, I must not have meditated
or done enough therapy,
or whatever enough.
Right?
>>LISA: Can't I just let it go?
>>HANSON: Yeah.
Like step one-- hey, I am upset.
And I think it's
really important
to start with a kind of
kindness for yourself.
Because if you can't be
really kind to yourself,
it's hard to sustain
kindness for other people
because we start
feeling like we're
running on empty,
running on fumes.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HANSON: So that would
be part one for me.
Part two for me is
to really appreciate
how good it feels to let go.
Make a tight fist.
Oh, 10 seconds-- I
just wanna let go.
And it feels so good to let go.
>>LISA: It starts to flow again.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
So to let go in relationships--
so valuing letting go,
realizing why it's good for
me to let go of my grievances
with you.
Now, third, I need to take
action if it's appropriate.
We need to talk about something
that's real, et cetera.
But if my mind is caught-- and I
call it the simulator-- looping
over that conversation,
rewriting that email,
wondering why others
didn't step in.
Because, as you know,
the famous saying--
neurons that fire
together wire together.
Well, you are wiring that
negativity, that resentment,
that low self-esteem, that
case against other people,
that mistrust of
life altogether--
you're wiring that
into your brain.
Plus, we have a
brain-- as you know--
that's very vulnerable
to over-learning
from negative experiences.
That's the negativity
bias of the brain.
Then I say like, Velcro for
the bad, Teflon for the good.
So summing it up.
I want to, myself--
there's enough
suffering in life as it is.
I don't want to add excess
needless suffering, including
getting all cranky
about other people.
I want to move to letting
go as soon as possible
and try to find that
sweet spot between love
and power, compassion
and assertiveness.
>>LISA: So you do
this consciously.
>>HANSON: Very.
>>LISA: I mean, yeah.
It does--
>>HANSON: When I'm on my game,
which isn't all the time.
>>LISA: It takes a
conscious action, because,
as you just said--
and I want you
to expand this a little bit.
Why does the brain
hold on to negativity?
Why is it so much more impactful
on the brain than positivity?
>>HANSON: Right.
>>LISA: Why?
>>HANSON: Well, this
is what scientists
call the negativity
bias of the brain--
tons of studies about it.
The bottom line is that
as our ancestors evolved
and the nervous system
has been evolving
for 600 million years-- I
think of each one of us having
inside a little lizard, mouse,
and monkey loosely associated
with the brain stem
subcortex and primate stages
of evolution.
And those little critters were
living in tough conditions.
So they had to both get
carrots and avoid sticks--
carrots like food, mating
opportunities, et cetera;
sticks like predators,
natural hazards--
>>LISA: Danger.
>>HANSON: Yeah, dangers.
OK.
Both are important, but
here's the difference.
If you fail to get
a carrot today,
you'll have a chance
at a carrot tomorrow.
But if you fail to avoid
that stick today, whack.
>>LISA: There's no tomorrow.
>>HANSON: No more
carrots forever.
Exactly.
So now we have a brain
that does four things.
One, it scans for bad news.
Two, it hyperfocuses on it.
Three, it overreacts to it.
For example, if you play
two sounds for people
inside an MRI, they're equally
loud, but one is pleasant,
one is unpleasant.
Wing!
The brain reacts more
to the unpleasant.
And then, fourth,
the whole package
is fast-tracked into
emotional memory.
Once burned, twice shy.
So, for example, think
about a relationship.
10 things happen in a day, nine
are positive, one's negative.
Hmm.
What's the one you think
about when you go to sleep
or when you get up the
next morning, which
is where we started here.
>>LISA: Right.
>>HANSON: Relationships,
since we're
talking about that--
interactions in relationships.
Negative ones have much more
power than positive ones.
>>LISA: That's why the
daily news is so popular,
or the nightly news.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
Yeah.
If it bleeds, it
leads in journalism.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
>>LISA: So why is it sometimes
when we have a bad day,
we take it out on the
ones we love the most.
What is that?
>>HANSON: I think it's
for a lot of reasons.
One, they're safer
to take it out on.
Because if you take it out on
your boss or the police officer
who pulled you over
for a ticket-- uh oh.
You're going to be in trouble.
So they become natural
lightning rods.
I think that's one reason.
I think another reason is
that it's natural in us
to want to share our
pain with others.
But I think it's so
important to make
it clear to the other
person-- I'm not blaming you
for my bad day.
I'd love it if--
>>LISA: You'd listen.
>>HANSON: In other words,
I'd call that-- yeah.
It's responsibly
sharing your experience.
This is how it is for me, and
I'm not blaming you for it.
>>LISA: And I don't need
you to fix it, I just
need you to listen.
Right?
>>HANSON: Yeah.
I think especially,
as studies show,
that statement is very
useful for men to hear,
because otherwise-- again, as
a generalization about gender,
you have to be
always careful about.
But still, if most
men don't hear
that you don't need
to fix it, they're
going to want to fix it.
A lot out of
because they're very
moved by the upset or
pain of their partner,
whether they're in
a gay relationship
or a heterosexual one.
They want to fix it.
>>LISA: You have to put
the disclaimer out first.
But that natural ability for men
to want to solve, rescue, fix,
be the hero is,
again, in the brain.
It's part of the biochemistry.
>>HANSON: Sure, and
it's also culture, too.
>>LISA: Culture.
>>HANSON: Right.
Exactly.
And I think it's
helpful to realize
that it's well-intended at
bottom-- usually, not always.
But it's usually
well-intended by bottom,
even if it's obnoxious.
And it's good to
say, no, I don't
need you to solve my problem, I
just want to connect with you.
>>LISA: Yes.
That's so interesting.
That a whole nother
conversation about men and women
and how we interpret
each other's
conversations and
communication differently.
But women could look at that as,
oh, you're basically telling me
I'm stupid and I don't
know how to do it myself.
>>HANSON: Totally.
>>LISA: I don't need to
be the damsel in distress.
So we overreact.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
>>LISA: So it goes
back to the grievances.
So what do you find is the
main cause of discontent
in relationships?
>>HANSON: Wow.
So we're talking about adult
romantic relationships?
>>LISA: Let's-- yeah.
Start there.
>>HANSON: Keep it there.
I think the main
source of discontent
is feeling let down by
your partner in some way.
And often it's really subtle.
>>LISA: Unsupported.
>>HANSON: Like you
look at your partner,
and your partner looks away.
You don't feel like
your partner is
being willing to give you
the gift of attention.
Or you realize-- it's
very common for women--
that you're doing a lot
more of the daily grind--
more dishes, more childcare,
more laundry, what have you--
and it just doesn't feel fair.
You feel let down
by the other person.
Or, flip it the other way.
Again, in a common pattern in
a heterosexual relationship,
the man feeling let down
by his partner who's
no longer very interested
in him as a lover,
or doesn't bring that
dimension to their life--
not just for the few
dozen minutes every week
that they're actually erotically
involved with each other.
So my larger point is it's
around feeling let down.
And so one thing that I try
to do on my side of the street
is really zero in on what
I call unilateral virtue.
In other words, how can
I be the best partner
I can be, within my own code as
to what I see is appropriate,
and you just zero out, line
out, the maximum reasonable
responsibility I can take
for your grievances with me.
How can I give
you the max that I
can give you, that's
reasonable for me
to do it, and then do it
again and again and again?
And that's good for me.
It's also benevolent and
virtuous and stuff like that,
but that's your
best-on strategy to get
what you need from your partner.
I see so many people-- I've
been a long-time therapist,
including couples counselor,
and I see so many couples,
they're just waiting
for the other person
to make their move.
>>LISA: To say that wrong thing.
>>HANSON: Yeah, and I
think break the deadlock.
You take care of your
side of the street.
Let your partner take care of
his or her side of the street.
And things are going
to be a lot better.
So that's one thing.
And the other is, I
try to help myself--
this is where we're
probably going
to go in the conversation-- be
resourced inside myself, which
means changing my brain
for the better over time
to have the capability to
really hear your grievances,
including the
topspin, including,
honestly, the unfair
aspects of it.
Because you're revved up,
and that's just how it is.
To stay present with
it and not feel so
flooded by it that I have
to go to war with you
to make it go away.
Right?
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
Interesting.
>>HANSON: You know,
there's a classic line--
fences make for good neighbors.
The more centered
one is over here
and the more resourced one is
over here-- much research shows
this is true-- the more intimate
we can be with each other.
>>LISA: Is that where your
Buddhist practices come in,
where you really learn
how to be centered?
>>HANSON: I think in the
combination, the sweet spot
of compassion and
equanimity-- in other words,
where you're both-- you really
let your heart open enough
to feel the other person.
I think many, many people don't
feel resourced enough inside
to actually let their heart
become as wide as it naturally
would be, because they just
feel overwhelmed by it.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HANSON: Or they get
caught up in feeling
guilty about the issue of the
other person and so forth.
So the art is to have
your heart be super open.
But to sustain that, you also
need to have some equanimity.
You need to be able to realize
that your suffering is not
my own.
Of the thousands of causes
upstream at this moment
that are causing your suffering,
very few them, if any,
have my name on them.
So that plays.
But the broader point though,
is to resource yourself.
And that's where I'm
much more interested
in the neuropsychology
of learning,
because that's what's
really skillful.
>>LISA: I love that you're
saying resource yourself.
So how do you-- I mean, maybe
you're overwhelmed, burnt out,
and then there's more
demands and more demands
that are put on you.
How do you resource
your own happiness?
You say that you can
hardwire happiness.
How?
>>HANSON: Let's put it in
a relationship situation.
So we'll just use
a concrete example.
Let's say you're with
someone who is feeling like
you're-- let's say she feels
that he is letting her down.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HANSON: OK?
And so for him to
respond to that,
he needs to have
resources inside.
He needs to have the ability
to sustain compassion for her.
He needs the ability to actually
assert himself in a real way.
Because if you can't say no,
your yes doesn't mean anything.
>>LISA: Wow.
That's a powerful statement.
Yes.
>>HANSON: Yeah, for women often,
as well as for men, as well
as other kinds of resources.
So in that context, then, what
would be some of the resources
a person might
want to draw upon?
You know, feeling
centered, feeling loving,
having a sense of
appropriate boundaries,
being able to sustain
empathy for the other person,
having some control of
their own attention--
to be able to stay present
rather than wander off.
Those are just normal resources.
Resources is a fancy word.
I use the phrase
inner strengths--
the good stuff we want to
grow inside of ourselves.
>>LISA: Yes.
Cultivate.
>>HANSON: So then
the question is,
how do you grow it
inside yourself?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HANSON: Because, again,
studies show about a third,
roughly, of the causes of
the resources that people
have are based in
their genetics.
OK.
That means that two
thirds, in principle,
is under our own power.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
And I'm all for that part.
>>LISA: I'll take it.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
Exactly right.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HANSON: And so
the good news is
that you can grow
resources inside yourself.
And the real news is that it's
your responsibility to do it
or not, right?
So then I get into-- and maybe
we could talk about that.
How do you grow
resources in your brain
so that, as you go
through life, instead
of your learning curve being
kind of flat, like that, no.
You're really steep.
You learn how to learn.
You get good at getting good.
>>LISA: And those are the
memories and the learning
strategies that you remember
even more, because they've
got emotion attached
to them, right?
>>HANSON: Yeah.
Really good news, actually, is
that these inner strengths-- so
let's use examples of them.
Mindfulness, compassion,
patience, determination,
resilience, abilities, feeling
loved, feeling of self-worth,
feeling like genuinely--
sorry to bang
the microphone there-- feeling
like a genuinely good person
deep in your heart.
Kind of the final taboo is
to acknowledge to yourself
that you really actually
are a good person-- not
a perfect person,
but a good person.
Right?
>>LISA: Yesh.
>>HANSON: OK.
So these are different
kinds of resources.
They're also what we'd like
to grow in our children,
or if we work with other people
as a coach or a therapist
or a health care
provider, a teacher.
We want to grow that in others.
OK?
So this is the good
stuff we all want.
Right?
How do you get it
into your brain?
So here, bottom line,
it's a two-stage process.
First, you need to
have an experience
of this inner strength,
which is usually enjoyable.
It actually feels good.
>>LISA: It has a good emotion.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
And it's motivating to do it.
It feels good to feel grateful.
It feels good to be
determined and strong.
It feels good to relax.
It feels good to be loving.
It feels good to be loved.
All of these are various
kinds of inner strengths.
So that's really neat to
notice in the first place.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HANSON: These are
usually sweet experiences.
And then second, most important,
don't waste them on your brain.
You need to stay with
the activated experience
to install it in some sort
of change in neural structure
or function.
If you don't install it,
it's wasted on your brain.
It might be--
>>LISA: Oh, so if you
don't actually practice it.
>>HANSON: Take it in.
If you don't let it sink in.
If you don't take the dozen
or so seconds, loosely,
to help it sink
in, you're learning
from this moment of
feeling appreciated.
I feel appreciated by you.
What will I do with this moment?
Or, this is interesting.
What will I do with that moment?
When a person finishes
the dishes, it's done.
You have an opportunity
to feel complete.
>>LISA: Take the time to say
thank you to your partner.
Yes.
>>HANSON: To be intimate
with your own self
as well as intimate with
others, to really receive
the experience and
help it sink into you.
So the fancy-- it's a two-stage
process, from short-term memory
buffers to long-term
storage, from state to trait,
activation to installation.
And it's kind of
like in real estate.
You know real estate boils
down to three things--
location, location, location.
Learning, including
personal growth learning,
emotional learning,
spiritual learning,
motivational learning,
life learning,
boils down to three
things-- installation,
installation, installation.
>>LISA: Oh.
All right.
Well, let's take a look
here at Rick Hanson talking
about hardwiring happiness.
Take a look here.
>>HANSON: Wow.
So what I want to
do here if I could
is share with you a very
simple yet powerful method,
grounded in neuroscience, for
turning passing experiences
into lasting structure, useful
structure, inside our brain.
In other words, turning
experiences into the happiness
or the resilience or the
other inner strengths
that we really want
inside ourselves.
I sort of stumbled on this
method when I was in college.
But to explain the context, I
have to take you back a little
before, into my own
up and down childhood.
So I grew up in a loving home--
good parents, intact family.
But I was very, very young
going through school.
I have a late birthday
and I skipped a grade.
And that combined with my kind
of shy and seriously dorky
temperament-- you
know, skinny, glasses,
picked last for baseball,
the whole thing.
Well, what it led to
were lots of experiences
of being left out or put down
by the other kids in school.
Now, what happened to me
was very small compared to,
unfortunately, what happens
to many, many other people.
But we all have normal
needs to feel cared for,
to feel cared about.
We are the most profoundly
social species on the planet.
As we evolved in the Serengeti,
exile was a death sentence.
Causes have effects.
And if we don't get the supplies
that we need, bit by bit,
it's kind of like we're
living on a thin soup.
You can survive, you can make
it, but there's a hollowness,
an emptiness inside.
In my own case--
hopefully this will work.
Yes.
I ended up with lots of bad
thoughts and feelings inside
of me as a result.
Then I went off to college.
And I began to notice
something really
powerful and interesting.
Some small good
thing would happen--
you know, a girl would
smile at me in the elevator,
some guy would throw me the
football in intramural football
and say, "good catch, Hanson."
You know, that was really good.
Or guys would invite me to
go out for pizza-- you know,
basic stuff of everyday life.
And then I would
have an experience.
I would feel a little
included or a little wanted,
a little appreciated.
Then the question is, what
would I do with that experience?
If I dealt with
it like I usually
did, which was to kind of
ignore it, let it pass along,
I kept feeling lonely
and inadequate.
But I began to notice that if
I did something different, if I
stayed with it a dozen
or so seconds in a row,
it felt like something
was gradually
coming into me that
was actually good.
And I began feeling better
and better and better
and more confident.
Any single time I did this
wasn't a mind-blowing moment.
I had a few of those
through other means.
But the good things really
did add up over time for me,
definitely.
And now, years later, many years
later, as a neuropsychologist,
I began to understand
what I was actually doing.
I wasn't just changing my mind.
I was actually
changing my brain.
That's because, as the
neuroscientists say,
neurons that fire
together wire together.
Passing mental states become
lasting neural traits.
Bit by bit, I was actually
weaving these resources
into the fabric of my brain,
and therefore my life.
>>LISA: So let's talk
about how we can actually
reconstruct memories
in our brain.
>>HANSON: Sure.
>>LISA: We can take
bad, old memories,
and can you actually really
change them in your brain?
>>HANSON: Oh, completely.
>>LISA: You can take the heat
off of them, or are they just--
>>HANSON: You'll never forget
what actually happened,
but the charge on what happened,
and given the negativity bias,
the over-learning
from what happened,
and ideas or behaviors that were
useful when you were 10 years
old or 10 months old--
>>LISA: Or the
decisions that you
made as a result of those, yes.
>>HANSON: Exactly right.
Those can be cleared away.
So maybe I'll give you
an example, all right?
>>LISA: OK.
>>HANSON: OK.
So one thing to
do-- three things.
Very simple.
Look for good facts.
They're real facts.
I don't believe in
positive thinking;
I believe in realistic
thinking-- seeing
the whole mosaic of reality: the
good, the bad, and the neutral.
And I mean good or bad
not moralistically,
but good is that which leads
to happiness and welfare
for yourself and others.
Bad is that which leads
to suffering and harm.
OK.
So look for the good
facts in everyday life--
the flowers that are blooming,
the dishes that are done.
>>LISA: Oh, current
life, not in the memory.
>>HANSON: Correct.
Or you could look for
them in your past.
You know, in the past,
people were kind to you.
In the future, good
facts are likely.
You're going to get
home this evening
at the end of a long day.
So look for good facts,
including good facts
in yourself-- or,
in a relationship,
good facts about your partner.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HANSON: I've been
married 31 years,
and it's easy to kind of take
your partner for granted.
And I think it's
a useful practice.
I do this myself.
I look for good
facts in my partner,
or I try to see them newly, the
ones I'm already familiar with.
>>LISA: Great idea.
Yes.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
So see the good facts.
Two.
Let yourself have
a good feeling.
A lot of times we recognize
the good facts-- oh,
I got that done.
Whatever.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>HANSON: And the kid hugs me.
Mommy, I love you.
Yeah, OK.
Nice.
Right?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HANSON: Or, you know, so
your boss says good job,
and, oh, OK, whatever.
Right?
You get a tricky
email done-- whatever.
No.
Let yourself feel it.
Because you want to get those
neurons firing together so
you're actually having
a rich experience.
And then really take it in.
Take the extra 10, 20, 30
seconds to kind of marinate
in the experience, enjoy it,
stay with it, open to it.
Get those neurons
firing together
so they really wire that
experience into you.
So to use that--
want me to give you
a practical example
in a relationship?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HANSON: OK.
Great.
So let's say you're trying
to mend a relationship--
because, you know, "Rust
Never Sleeps," right?
The fabric of a relationship is
so easy to fray, cut by cut--
the death of a
thousand paper cuts.
>>LISA: Well, especially when
you're together for so long,
yeah.
>>HANSON: And you're busy.
It's a work relationship,
a family relationship--
it doesn't
necessarily need to be
a mate or a romantic
relationship.
>>LISA: Right.
OK.
>>HANSON: Anyway,
so let's suppose
you're trying to
repair something,
and it would be useful
in the repair process
to feel cared about in ways that
you factually are cared about.
I'm not making anything up here.
So let's say you and I are in
a relationship of some kind.
>>LISA: All right.
>>HANSON: So I
have an opportunity
to recognize factually that,
oh, you do appreciate me.
Or, oh, you said
thanks, or, oh, you
didn't do that annoying thing
because you care about me
and you're actually sincere
in trying to repair here.
Did I notice that good fact?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HANSON: Second, did
I let myself feel it?
And third, can I just kind of
hang out with it, privately
inside myself--
five, 10, 20 seconds
in a row, a small little thing.
And yet, bit by bit, you
can change your brain
for the better.
And then, if I want
to heal it-- which
is kind of where
we started here.
Let's suppose I haven't
felt so cared about by you.
Maybe you were mean to me.
Maybe you betrayed
me in some way.
Maybe something happened.
But authentically, truly,
you are more caring today.
You are trying to mend
this relationship, right.
What I can do-- and I
use the acronym "HEAL"
to describe this whole process.
H-E-A-L. So first you have
to have the experience--
in my example here,
feeling cared about.
>>LISA: OK
>>HANSON: And then to get it
into the brain, installation,
I enrich the experience
by feeling it in my body
and staying with it.
And it's kind of
private, it's real.
And I also A for absorb it.
I sense and intend
it sinking in.
And then, if I want, I can
link this positive experience
of feeling cared about-- by the
other person, let's say, here
and now, today.
I can link that
positive experience
to some negative material.
So have, enrich, absorb,
link gives us "HEAL."
>>LISA: Ah.
>>HANSON: So in
terms of linking,
I could feel
appreciated or seen,
or at least you have good
intentions toward me,
at minimum.
So I'm feeling then now.
And I could also be aware
in the background that
sense of being let down by
you-- which also might have been
turbocharged by earlier
life experiences,
even going back into
childhood when I was let down
by other people as well.
>>LISA: Oh, I see.
>>HANSON: So since neurons that
fire together wire together,
I'm being aware of both of
those things at the same time.
The positive gradually
associates with the negative,
soothing it, easing
it, and eventually
potentially replacing
it altogether.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>HANSON: And that's
something that any person can
do in the flow of everyday life,
which I think is fantastic.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
That's how you change a
memory and you over-layer it
with a positive association.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
And when yo u say memory,
you really-- I know.
More the emotional residues
of lived experience.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>HANSON: You won't change the
recollection of the events,
right?
But you will definitely
change the charge on them.
>>LISA: Many times you've
talked about letting it absorb,
sitting with yourself.
And we're going to
take a look here
at a video where Rick talks
about the neurological benefits
of meditation.
And we'll talk more about
it after you take a look.
>>HANSON: How many of you
meditate at least once a year?
OK.
Once a month?
That's good.
We'll just leave it right there.
We're grateful for
anything we can get.
No.
That's good.
OK.
So this is about you
in a lot of ways.
People who do some kind
of meditative practice
sort of routinely, pretty
much much of the time,
you know, 10, 20,
30 minutes a day,
45 on a good day-- in other
words, people like me,
real world-- they actually
have measurably thicker
brains in certain key regions.
So the number one region up
here is called the insula.
It's a part of the
brain-- and again, there
are two of them--
that is involved
in what's called
interoception, tuning
in to the internal
state of your body
as well as your deep feelings.
No wonder-- they're
tuning in to themselves.
Probably a lot of
what they're doing
is practicing
mindfulness of breathing.
They're getting in touch.
They're staying really
present with what's going on.
No wonder-- they're using,
and therefore they're
building, much like a muscle,
by analogy, literally.
They're using it, so they
build it-- the insula.
The second region is
the frontal regions
of the prefrontal cortex,
the frontal areas that
are involved, again, in
controlling attention.
No surprise here, as well.
They're using attention, so
they're getting more control
over it, and they're
strengthening its neural basis.
The third region up at the
top is somatosensory cortex.
It's the part that
basically they're
tuning in to their body.
It's less relevant
for our purposes.
The point is that people who
routinely practice something--
in this particular case,
mindfulness meditation-- build
up the neural substrates
that are its basis.
Normally we lose about
10,000 brain cells a day.
That may sound horrible, but
we were born with 1.1 trillion.
And we also have
several thousand a day
born inside mainly
the hippocampus,
actually, in what's
called neurogenesis.
So losing 10,000 a day
isn't that big a deal.
But the net bottom line is
that a typical 80-year-old
will have lost about
4% of brain mass.
It's called cortical
thinning with aging.
It's a normal process.
So in this study,
there was a comparison
between the meditators
and the non-meditators.
The meditators are
the blue circles.
The non-meditators are the
red squares, age-matched
and so forth.
This was not a
longitudinal study.
It was a cohort study with
some good statistical controls.
The people who are the
red squares, the controls,
experienced normal
cortical thinning
in these three
regions of interest,
whereas the people who
routinely meditated and worked
that muscle, quote
unquote, did not experience
cortical thinning
in that region.
And they're the blue circles
with the line straight across.
That has a lot of implications
for an aging population.
I had a birthday yesterday, and
so, you know, it's on my mind.
And there's always a little
more gray hair every year
in the mirror.
So anyway, use it
or lose it, right?
It applies to the brain as well
as to other aspects of life.
That takes us to a
really important point
that, for me, is a major
takeaway in this territory--
that our experience
really matters.
It doesn't just matter
moment to moment in terms of,
OK-- subjective well-being,
as Bob was saying earlier.
You know, how it feels to be me.
But it also really matters
in the lasting residues
that we-- it leaves behind
woven into our very being.
>>LISA: OK.
So we've seen some of
the neurological benefits
of meditation.
But how can you use meditation
in a practical, practical way?
Not sitting necessarily
30 minutes--
>>HANSON: In a cave in Tibet?
>>LISA: Yeah, or hours
on the mountaintop.
Yeah.
Let's talk about--
you break it down
into little tiny parts
of the day, right?
>>HANSON: Mhm.
Yeah.
>>LISA: How?
>>HANSON: So, first, there
are many kinds of meditation.
Some of them are just things
like mindfulness of breathing,
et cetera.
Others involve a
sense of relationship
with spirit, or the
divine-- more of a prayer.
Either one of those is
contemplative practice.
>>LISA: And it's not one
meditation fits all, right?
>>HANSON: Correct.
Exactly right.
You know, it's kind of a
joke, like in the gym--
those-- what's the
best exercise to do?
It's the one you'll actually do.
The best meditation to do is
the one you'll actually do.
>>LISA: Is the one
you'll actually do-- OK.
>>HANSON: And when
you do it-- again,
like we talked about
earlier-- take it in.
Use that "HEAL" process
in your own way, which
is a very natural
process, of letting
the benefits of your own
meditation, whatever it is,
really sink into you so
you reap the rewards,
you harvest the rewards of
the seeds that you've sewn.
>>LISA: What are some of the
medications that you like?
Like, what are some of your
own personal practices?
>>HANSON: That's
a great question.
I love, honestly,
just the simple matter
of disengaging from worldly
concerns and coming home--
coming home, especially to
the basic sense of the body.
>>LISA: The core.
>>HANSON: Yeah, the
basic sense the body.
We tend to live our
lives, honestly,
with a kind of chronic
inner homelessness--
>>LISA: Ha.
Wow.
>>HANSON: --where we've
lost touch with ourselves.
And so just coming back--
this breath, this moment,
the body's here.
It doesn't need to
be a perfect moment.
And then in that, within a
breath or two, if not more,
there's a sense
of just experience
itself flowing along.
And when you get a sense of
your experience flowing along,
you really realize more and
more how much it's passing,
how much it's transient.
So we don't need to get
our knickers in a twist
so much about this moment,
this sensation, this thought.
It's kind of streaming along.
It's there.
You're not trying to shut
it down when you meditate.
>>LISA: Right.
>>HANSON: That's a mistake
a lot of people make.
You're not trying to not think.
You're just disengaging from it.
Instead of being swept
along by the river--
>>LISA: So it's like right
before twilight, right
before you're falling asleep,
but not falling asleep.
>>HANSON: That's a certain sense
of it, and you're very alert.
So it's that sweet spot--
again, the intersection
of two circles of being very
relaxed while being very alert.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HANSON: Right?
And so instead of
being caught up
in the river, the
stream of consciousness,
swept along with the boulders
and icebergs and alligators,
whatever, you're on the stream.
You're on the banks, sitting
back here going, whoa.
That's pretty interesting--
streaming on by.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>HANSON: So that's one thing.
And then, if you want,
you can deliberately
cultivate certain qualities.
You can open to feelings
of compassion or loving
kindness for yourself
or other beings.
Or you can also open to a
growing tranquility, a growing
feeling of being centered.
And, as you register
these states of being,
you can also help them
install themselves
into your brain as wholesome
traits of being, as well.
>>LISA: Well, this has
to do with a conversation
about forgiveness, as well.
>>HANSON: OK.
>>LISA: Because when--
say you're in that moment
and you have a really
peaceful moment,
and then the next moment is
another very stressful moment.
Or somebody does
something wrong to you,
or the bank account
is still at zero.
You launch back into that.
So you're fine in
the meditative state,
but then you jump into the next
moment, and it's not so pretty.
>>HANSON: Right.
>>LISA: So how do
you carry that over?
I mean--
>>HANSON: You mean after
you're done meditating
or while you're in a meditation?
>>LISA: No.
After you're done
meditating, how
do you deal with chronic stress?
>>HANSON: Oh, yeah.
So people can, I think, sort
of mystify and meditation.
But in a lot of ways,
it really boils down
to it's a kind of training.
And like any sort
of training-- to use
a really technical term in
neuropsychology-- "Mo Better."
In other words, more
episodes, more times
in which you're actually
engaging your training--
meditating every
day, for example,
or doing yoga every day, or
walking the dog peacefully
every day, or doing Pilates
very mindfully every day,
or knitting or doing handwork.
Brushing your daughter's
hair every day.
>>LISA: Walking
meditation from you.
I do that all the time.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
Absolutely.
So "Mo Better" in that sense.
And then, second, inside
those episodes of practice,
whatever they happen to
be for you that fit you,
more depth of engagement.
And if you do that,
you will be creating
changes in neural
structure and function
that you'll then be able to
take with you, increasingly,
wherever you go out
there in daily life.
That's why I think it's
important to train,
to do these practices that
are wholesome, whatever
the ones that
appeal to a person,
and then steepen your
learning curve from them
so that increasingly-- and I
think you're exactly right.
We've all known people who
have good meditation practice,
and they're really neurotic
and a pain in the neck
to live with, work
with, or sleep with,
or all of the above.
Right?
And, no.
You want to be able to engage
the challenges of life.
There's a joke saying
in the monastery-- think
you're so enlightened?
Go home for the holidays.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
Tell your family what you do.
>>HANSON: You want
to be able to yeah.
I think of it as like
a sailboat with a keel.
Right?
And I sailed once as a beginner
with a boat that had no keel,
and I capsized it.
We want a keel in our sailboat.
As we do our
practices-- including
by just watching your program,
for example, and letting it
sink in-- steepening
your learning curve
from Gaiam TV, et cetera.
As you do that, you deepen
this keel of your sailboat.
And research is beginning
to show you're actually
changing the structure
of your brain.
And as you do that-- as you
become more resourced inside,
as you become more trained
through repetition,
as more of these good things
get installed inside you,
your keel gets deeper.
You can afford to go out
and sail the deep dark blue.
The storms don't knock
you over so much.
You can risk greater things.
You can dream bigger dreams.
And if you do get
banged hard, you're
going to recover a
lot more quickly.
>>LISA: Yeah.
That's a great
metaphor, as well.
All right.
We're going to take a
look at another clip
here of you talking about the
different levels of the brain.
Take a look at this.
>>HANSON: What happens if
we feel over-challenged
and we're not able to experience
being fundamentally safe,
even if we're dealing
with challenges
or threats or danger?
We are not able to feel
fundamentally satisfied
if we're dealing with losses
or opportunities just out
of reach.
And we're not able, let's say,
to feel fundamentally loved
even as we grapple with issues
in the relationship field.
Then the brain has
a second setting.
It moves out of the green zone,
which I call the responsive
mode of the brain, and it
tips into the fight or flight
red zone, the reactive
mode of the brain--
two settings of the brain.
And in that state, in terms
of the avoiding harm system,
we tip into a state
of fear-- flight.
We want to withdraw from what's
unpleasant, or resist it.
Or, in terms of the
reward-seeking part
of the brain, the carrot-seeking
part of the brain,
we tip into a state of
frustration, driveness,
and grasping, if you will.
And in terms of the attaching
to others system of the brain,
when we experience that those
basic needs for connection
are not met, we tip into
a state of envy or shame
or loneliness or, in
a word, heartache.
This is the brain
in the red zone.
The body kicks into gear.
The stress hormones
flood through us,
including moving back
up into the brain,
and we run from the lion or
we chase the opportunity or we
struggle with or
cling to others.
Bodily resources are burned
faster than we can take them
in, long-term projects
are put on hold,
and the mind, in
three basic words,
is colored by a state of fear,
frustration, and heartache--
in terms of those three
core systems and core needs.
That's a brain that's
colored strongly
by qualities of
resisting, in terms
of the avoiding system,
qualities of grasping,
in terms of the approach
and reward system,
and a quality of
clinging in terms
of the attaching
to others system.
Or, in a single
encompassing word,
a brain colored by craving
and therefore suffering.
So for those of you who are
tracking what I'm doing,
I'm trying to
naturalize the dharma.
In other words, I'm trying to
ground this ancient Buddhist
psychology that's
profoundly penetrating
in its analysis of
human psychology
without reference, in the
frame that I'm working in,
to anything supernatural or
metaphysical or transcendental.
In that frame, the
Buddha's analysis,
of course, as you know,
is that forms of craving
lead to suffering.
>>LISA: So how does one get out
of the red zone of the brain?
We left it off there.
>>HANSON: All right.
Well, so I'll have to give
a little explanation--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HANSON: OK.
Good.
So a way to think about it
is that the brain evolved
in three stages, which I
summarize as lizard, mouse,
and monkey-- brain
stem, subcortex, cortex.
That's a super simple
summary of a lot of material,
so I don't want to freak out
the neuroscientists out there.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HANSON: But anyway,
it's a useful summary.
And as our ancestors
evolved, they
had to solve survival problems
related to our three core
needs-- safety,
satisfaction, and connection.
And obviously as the
brain has evolved,
we've gotten better
and better at that.
OK.
Well, what happens when
you don't feel safe
or you don't feel
satisfied, broadly speaking,
connected or loved--
the brain goes into
the red zone, fight
or flight of reactivation.
>>LISA: Instantly.
>>HANSON: Or brrp,
freeze response.
Either way, long-term projects
in the body are put on hold,
so the immune system gets
weaker, digestion goes down,
hormones get very disturbed.
And the mind, in terms
of the three broad needs
I'm describing-- safety,
satisfaction, and connection--
is colored with a sense of
fear, frustration, or heartache,
in three broad umbrella terms.
That's the red zone.
The good news is
that in our bodies,
Mother Nature has evolved
as well the green zone.
When we experience in
our core that we're
fundamentally safe,
fundamentally satisfied,
and fundamentally
connected and loved,
then we default to our resting
state, this sustainable
equilibrium condition in which
the body repairs and refuels
itself.
It recovers from
bursts of stress.
And, in terms of those three
needs-- safety, satisfaction,
and connection--
the mind is colored
with a sense of peace,
contentment, and love, in three
broad umbrella terms.
So much of what life's
about-- as well as
to use the example
Buddhist practice--
is about getting
out of the red zone
and resting increasingly
in the green zone
even as we deal with the
challenges of life, of being
busy, raising a family,
having a career, being on TV.
Even as we deal with
real challenges,
we can stay green
as we engage them.
>>LISA: Is that like
the relaxation response
or is it different?
>>HANSON: I think the
relaxation response
is a great resource,
speaking of that,
especially for
the safety system.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>HANSON: Because
as we relax, we
feel less threatened
and more stable.
If you think about
it, relaxation
is the opposite of fight
or flight-- or freezing.
>>LISA: And it usually
comes after fight or flight
though, right?
>>HANSON: Yeah.
A lot of what life's about
is how do you get out
of the red zone as fast
as possible, and second,
how do you stabilize
in the green zone
and deepen the keel
of your green zone,
deeper and deeper, so you
can stay green even when
the oatmeal starts
to fly around you.
And that's why taking
in the good-- as I
talk about in my book--
many times a day,
half a dozen times a day, less
than half a minute at a time,
is a reasonable expectation.
That's less than
five minutes a day.
>>LISA: And taking in the good.
What is that?
>>HANSON: Staying with
that useful experience.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HANSON: So when you're
in the green zone,
or having a taste of it, when
you're having a relaxation
response, when you're
feeling satisfied,
a wholesome pleasure,
you're drinking water
when you're thirsty.
>>LISA: You have a break.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
You have a break.
Whew.
Or you accomplish something, or
you're just enjoying yourself,
or you're feeling
grateful or glad.
That's the satisfaction system.
All right?
>>LISA: OK.
>>HANSON: Or if you feel
appreciated or included or seen
or liked or loved.
When you're having
these experiences,
like we were saying earlier,
don't waste them on your brain.
Stay with them
five, 10, 20 seconds
in a row to really hardwire
that happiness in you
and deepen the keel, the green
keel, of your sailboat one
synapse at the time, as it
were-- these little connections
between neurons.
To me, that's a
fantastic practice.
>>LISA: So more and more of
that is taking in the good,
and that builds the brain.
It built in the brain
the happiness factor.
>>HANSON: That's right.
It builds in your brain an
increasingly unconditional
inner peace.
So even when you're
threatened or challenged--
>>LISA: Nice.
>>HANSON: --you can stay
calm and centered and strong
inside yourself.
You start weaving into
your brain more and more
an unconditional contentment.
So even if there's loss around
you or you're obstructed,
you feel more and more
like you're already full.
And third, as you internalize,
again and again and again,
little moments that
are authentic-- we're
not making anything up here.
This is not looking
on the bright side.
This is seeing what's true.
There is attention here.
There is caring here.
There is respect here.
There is liking here.
>>LISA: Right.
Take a look at that.
>>HANSON: Good.
I have an opportunity
to actually feel that.
If we do that again
and again and again, we
build those strengths inside
so that we can stay green
as the challenges in
our life actually grow.
And I think that's a fantastic
practice because, in part, it's
usually enjoyable.
The green zone feels good.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HANSON: The more that we
deeply register the green zone
and we value it and come
home to it again and again,
the more it's going to
sink in, the more it's
going to weave itself into the
fabric of our brain and, thus,
our life.
>>LISA: So is that what you
talk about in "The Neurodharma
of Love?"
And what is that?
I love that name-- "The
Neurodharma of Love."
What is neurodharma?
>>HANSON: Well, for me,
neurodharma is a made-up term.
I don't think it'll
ever get me on Oprah.
But anyway, I like it
a lot-- geek that I am.
It puts together
the idea of thinking
about what are the underlying
causes and conditions in life
itself, in our
own animal nature,
coming in to an intimacy
with our own body?
What are the causes
and conditions
to be found there of profound
inner peace, wisdom, and love?
That's, to me, the territory
of the neurodharma--
the intersection of
modern neuropsychology
and the ancient wisdom
originating over
25,000 years ago in
the Buddhist dream
that's come all the
way to us today.
I think that's a really
interesting intersection,
again, of two circles.
And what I did is I applied
that to relationships,
including messy relationships.
It's easy to be loving and super
chill when you're partner's
just giving you
everything you want.
>>LISA: Yeah.
But then there's
financial issues,
and all of those things--
>>HANSON: Yeah.
Differences of opinion
about how to raise the kids
or live life together,
or busy schedules,
or misunderstandings.
>>LISA: Right.
Taking each other for granted.
>>HANSON: Taking each
other for granted
and all the rest of that.
So what that program's
about is the idea
of applying this incredible
toolbox from the Buddha
as well as the modern
toolbox from neuropsychology
and looking at the best
of both of those, applied
into relationships in
very, very practical ways.
And I think that's
incredibly important
because, as you said at the
very beginning, most of our joys
and most of our sorrows
happen in relationships.
We're the most social
species on the planet.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>HANSON: And as I find that,
as people feel-- a lot of people
feel like they're running on
empty and they're rattled.
They're being banged
on all day long.
So there's an internal
sense, if you will,
of deficit and disturbance.
And that's the underlying cause
of the red zone-- an underlying
sense of deficit
and disturbance.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>HANSON: So if you repeatedly
feed yourself and you feed
your heart, you gradually
undo that underlying sense
of deficit.
And as you gradually internalize
regulation and balance
and equanimity and ease, even as
you're dealing with real life.
Sometimes equanimity
is described
as walking evenly
over uneven ground.
>>LISA: Oh.
Yeah.
That makes sense.
That's a good visual.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
Yeah.
As you repeatedly
internalize that,
you become more and more
able to be really loving
in relationships as
well as really strong.
It's relatively
straightforward to be loving.
straightforward to be strong.
But to be loving and strong--
>>LISA: Can both people be
that in the relationship?
>>HANSON: Yes.
You have to respect each other.
>>LISA: That's a wonderful
image of a relationship-- two
loving, strong people.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
That's right.
>>LISA: Very wonderful.
All right.
Let's take a look
at more suggestions
that Rick Hanson
has in this video.
Take a look.
>>HANSON: What to do, right?
Well, you can intervene
at lots of levels.
I'm like a methods guy.
I'm a brain guy.
So I intervene in terms
of the mind and the brain.
What can you do?
Number one-- get out of reactive
episodes as fast as you can.
Get out of the red zone
as quick as you can.
Because your brain
is over-learning
from the red zone.
Every red zone episode
makes you one smidge, if not
10 smidges, more vulnerable
to a reactive fight or flight,
stressful, fear, frustration,
and heartache experience.
Get out of the red zone
as fast as you can.
Second, do what you
can outside yourself
to prevent red zone experiences.
You know?
Do what you can.
Think about schedule.
Think about not adding
too many commitments.
I should think
about that myself.
Think about doing
what you can to create
more safety in your world.
We do what we can.
All right?
Third, and perhaps
most important of all--
which will be my segue
into the practice
to do with you momentarily-- is
to, again and again and again,
help this vulnerable
Stone Age brain,
which is really
older than Stone Age.
The nervous system is
600 million years old.
You know?
Each of us has within us
a kind of inner lizard,
inner mouse, and inner
monkey loosely associated
with the three
layers of the brain.
So very loosely, that lizard
needs a lot of petting.
You're safe, little
lizard buddy.
It's OK.
The little mouse
needs a lot of cheese.
You have enough.
It's OK.
You're full.
There's enough.
And the monkey needs
a lot of hugging.
And especially is what's
called neuroplasticity.
The capacity of
the brain to learn
goes down as you
move back in time.
That inner mouse, but
especially the inner lizard,
needs a lot of
soothing and petting.
We need a lot of
experiences of safety.
So the third way to deal with
this fundamental issue-- this
is a design feature in
evolution that I've described.
The three needs, the
two fundamental settings
of the brain-- that's
a design feature.
But in the 21st
century, in many ways,
it's a kind of design flaw.
It's like a bug in
the Stone Age brain.
So the third thing we
can do about it is,
again and again and again,
help it land inside.
10 seconds at a time-- safe.
Fed.
Enough.
Connected.
Part of.
Seen.
Liked.
Maybe loved.
Again and again and again.
And help this brain
take in the good.
In other words, again
and again and again,
roughly 10 seconds at a
time, help it really land.
Because negative learning
lands immediately.
The brain fast tracks negative
experiences into storage
right away.
Positive experiences,
unless they're
highly intense or novel,
million-dollar moments,
need to be held in awareness
past some loose threshold,
that's on the order of five,
10, 20 seconds, for them
to have a chance of transferring
from short-term memory buffers
down into long-term storage.
So we need to help
ourselves really register it
when our safety needs
are basically met,
when our reward-seeking or
satisfaction-seeking needs are
basically met,
and really help it
land when our needs
for connection
are basically met-- not
necessarily perfectly.
As Jean-Paul Sartre said,
hell is other people.
OK?
So-- but basically met, OK?
>>LISA: OK.
So we're bringing
joy and strength
and love into a relationship.
Let's talk about compassion.
And what are the neurochemical
benefits of compassion?
And this is great for all ages.
>>HANSON: Oh, for sure.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HANSON: Compassion
is simply the wish
that a being not
suffer, usually combined
with a warm-hearted
sympathetic concern.
So it sounds kind of fancy,
but it's really simple.
>>LISA: What did you just say?
Yeah.
>>HANSON: Exactly.
Right.
And there's actually
great research
the shows that one of the
main drivers of the evolution
of the human brain,
which has tripled
in its volume in the
last three million years.
One of the major drivers
of that is the benefits
of compassion and love in
mother-child relationships,
and then mother-partner
relationships, and then
father-child relationships, and
then friendships, and the band
altogether.
So we evolved, if you will.
We are not so much
homosapiens, right?
The clever ape.
We are homocompassionatenus.
>>LISA: Oh, we are?
>>HANSON: Exactly
>>LISA: And this has developed
in the last three million
years?
>>HANSON: I would say the
level of compassion, yeah.
Compared to like
chimpanzees or bonobos,
who are very close to us,
they're mildly compassionate.
But they're very not that
compassionate, really.
Humans are very compassionate
across all things.
So how does it help us
to be compassionate?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HANSON: It's very
interesting, isn't it,
that opening your heart
to the suffering of others
helps you suffer less over time.
>>LISA: Yeah.
That is interesting.
>>HANSON: It is interesting.
And you're strengthening
your own heart.
And because it's our
nature to be compassionate,
when we feel compassionate for
others, it helps us feel safer.
Because any kind of loving
feelings are a safety
signal to the ancient
lizard inside the brain.
Because as our
ancestors evolved,
exile was a death
sentence in the Serengeti.
So whether it's love flowing
in or love flowing out,
broadly defined,
it's still love.
And when you feel love for
others or loved in turn,
that says, basically, OK.
We can get out of
the red zone now.
It's safe to go green.
So that's one benefit.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>HANSON: Also, the
compassion system,
the social engagement
system, it's called,
with related neurotransmitters
like oxytocin--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HANSON: And I just want
to say for the record
guys have oxytocin, too.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>HANSON: We only have about a
seventh as much as you ladies,
but we still have
oxytocin as well.
>>LISA: It's the chemical
that bonds women.
It's what happens when we--
>>HANSON: And men, as well.
>>LISA: --hang out together.
Oh, really?
>>HANSON: Oh, yeah.
Absolutely.
Totally.
>>LISA: Good to know.
>>HANSON: And even in spiritual
practice, devotional practices,
of various kinds, there's
a flow of oxytocin.
>>LISA: Is it when we
connect with each other, or--
>>HANSON: Yes.
>>LISA: Have fun?
>>HANSON: I'm not trying to
reduce the mysteries of love
and friendship and going
on shopping trips together
and the delight and all that
to just one little molecule.
But it's a major
vehicle of the process.
>>LISA: It's a hormone.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
It's a hormone outside the
brain or nervous system,
and it's called a
neurotransmitter
when it's in the brain
or nervous system.
But it's the same
molecule-- oxytocin.
>>LISA: And it
makes you feel good.
Is it like serotonin?
>>HANSON: It's
connected to serotonin.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HANSON: And it helps
us bond with each other.
It helps us feel
close with each other.
Sometimes we can
go too far with it
and get very
territorial and jealous
and all the craziness of that.
But a middle amount of it,
the middle way-- right?
Moderation.
And those oxytocin systems
are connected to other systems
in the brain, like the
natural opioids that
help us feel pleasure
and joy and happiness,
including subtle forms of
just contentment and ease.
Right?
So I think that, arguably, one
of the most important things
the world needs these days
and has needed all along
and will continue to need
is much more development
of practices of compassion.
It's easy and natural to
be compassionate for us.
The art is to be
compassionate for them.
>>LISA: That's one of the
Dalai Lama's main messages.
Yeah.
>>HANSON: It could be the
them who's sitting across
from you at a
dinner table, or it
could be a them down
the hall in your office,
or it could be a them on the
other side of the world, who
has a different religion from
you, a different language
from you, and so forth.
To expand compassion
while realizing
that you don't
waive your rights.
You're not agreeing
with the other person
necessarily or
approving of them.
>>LISA: Right.
That's important.
So compassion for someone
who you don't agree with.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
>>LISA: You just
feel compassionate
for their situation.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
And there are different
levels of that.
One level-- I admit it--
is, you know, honestly,
if you weren't
suffering so much,
you wouldn't be such a jerk.
I mean, OK.
There's a place for that.
I mean, there are deeper,
wiser levels, too,
of just pure benevolence.
Like, wow.
I feel your suffering.
I feel your pain.
I think in the Dalai Lama's line
he says, "my friends, the enemy
Chinese government."
>>LISA: Oh wow.
>>HANSON: Isn't that
profound and powerful?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HANSON: It doesn't
mean we agree.
We maybe adversaries
at one level.
And simultaneously, I know
you don't want to die, either;
you don't want your
children to die.
I know that you, too, will face
old age, disease, and death.
And I can have that
feeling for you.
Even if I can't do
anything about it,
compassion is sincere-- even
if you can't help others.
We can have
compassion for people
on the other side of the
world or close to home.
We can't do anything
about it, but we still
wish, sincerely,
that they not suffer.
>>LISA: Would the ultimate
place of compassion
be for those who have killed
others or harmed others?
>>HANSON: Yes.
And sometimes,
honestly, the compassion
is not yet
authentically available.
OK.
>>LISA: It takes a while.
>>HANSON: You need to go
through the cycle first of anger
or bringing to justice,
things like that.
But along the way, and then
growing over time, yeah.
I think a mature person--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HANSON: --and I
don't mean an age.
I mean, I've known
eight-year-olds
who could do this.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>HANSON: Where they
could have their heart
open to the kids who
were bullying them
while simultaneously really
developing strategies
to make that bullying stop.
>>LISA: Rather than-- that's a
better choice than victimhood.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HANSON: And it
doesn't mean that they
go to war with the bullies.
>>LISA: Right.
>>HANSON: Oftentimes
they realize
that if they get caught up with
the ones who have wronged us.
Then we're trapped.
We're stuck to them.
>>LISA: The cycle.
Yeah, that's true.
>>HANSON: And again, compassion
is very helpful there.
You know, in a
funny kind of way,
compassion has helped me be
more skillfully assertive.
It's helped me disengage.
If I can have
compassion for you,
I can disengage from
my overreactions.
>>LISA: You're not as triggered.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
I'm not as triggered.
Exactly.
I can act more
skillfully, including
asserting myself
more skillfully.
>>LISA: That is a great way.
Because one of the
questions I had
was how do you turn
off being triggered
by other people's behaviors.
And that, having
compassion for them,
is a brilliant way to do that.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
I'll tell you two things
that are key for me.
One is, after riding
out the storm-- which
could be a few seconds
or a few hours or days--
they're like, wow,
what happened?
>>LISA: Right.
And you get that shock.
>>HANSON: That was intense.
Yeah.
Or, you know, like, what?
How dare you?
And you kind of sort
through what was actual
and what was overstated in your
reaction to the other person.
>>LISA: Made up.
>>HANSON: But I'm
gonna say, yeah.
They did wrong you, for real.
I find for myself if I
get to two places, that's
what gets me free.
Number one, I take maximum
reasonable personal
responsibility for
my part-- reasonable.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HANSON: Maximum.
>>HANSON: What did I do?
What could I have
done more skillfully?
What could I learn
from this situation?
>>LISA: OK.
>>HANSON: And then
second, I have compassion.
I find compassion for the
other person's suffering.
And isn't that interesting?
We think that if we take
responsibility for our part,
even though they did us wrong,
and if we have compassion
for them, somehow
that'll make us
a chump, a doormat, a weak link.
>>LISA: No, I--
>>HANSON: But actually
it's the opposite.
It makes us stronger.
It makes us freer.
>>LISA: In the way you're
describing it, yes.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
And it brings us home
to our own green zone
and unconditional inner piece.
>>LISA: And especially it
is such a better option
than fear, anger, and
resentment, and victimhood.
>>HANSON: Yeah.
And in situations-- If you go
reactive with the other person,
you start sputtering and
fuming and drama, drama, drama.
>>LISA: And saying
really harmful things.
>>HANSON: Guess what?
You lose your vote.
You lose credibility.
You lose traction.
Or they overreact and
you get in these cycles.
>>LISA: And that brain
cascades, goes into the--
>>HANSON: Yeah.
And the brain overlearns
with that negativity bias
from that whole business.
On the other hand, if
you find your own center,
if you see more clearly,
you have compassion
for the other person,
you speak and act
in a more measured way--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HANSON: --a real way, you're
much more likely to prevail.
>>LISA: So you slow
down your speech.
>>HANSON: That helps--
a little detail.
>>LISA: So that they
could listen, or--
>>HANSON: Yeah, and
also, you feel centered.
>>LISA: Does it slow
down your rage response--
when you're really, you
know, when somebody's really
doing something wrong?
>>HANSON: It does
help to slow down.
I mean, Grandma's advice
is right-- you know, count
to 10, sweetie.
You know, it's good advice
for anybody at any age.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Yeah.
>>HANSON: That's really true.
And to be clear, I'm
not talking about a kind
of persona, which can
be really annoying.
Like, people have done therapy
and they come home, and, yes.
[MONOTONE VOICE] I hear you.
You just want to
like, whack them.
I mean, I'm talking about
something that's authentic.
But I do notice a big
difference between rolling over
and just, pssh.
>>LISA: Right
>>HANSON: Being nailed, or
victimized, if you will,
by the other person, or,
bam, bam, bam, going to war.
I think there's a middle place.
And you see it in great people
in the world-- Nelson Mandela.
>>LISA: Yes, you do.
>>HANSON: Aung San
Suu Kyi in Burma.
Dr. Martin Luther King,
Jr.-- people like that.
The Dalai Lama, as well.
They're centered.
They're strong.
They're the real deal.
>>LISA: As are you.
>>HANSON: Oh, thank
you very much.
There's a gravity
to them, you know?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HANSON: When it's
time to do that bit,
there's a gravity to them.
>>LISA: Well, thank you for
explaining that so clearly,
and for being the
example, really truly,
of what you talk about.
Even though you might
have those moments,
you really have a clear
way of explaining it
on a neuroscientific
level, psychological level,
and bringing in the Buddha.
>>HANSON: Ah.
Thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
>>HANSON: Lisa, it's
been great to be here.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
Thanks for the connection.
>>HANSON: That's great.
Definitely.
>>LISA: And if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
with Rick Hanson, you
can go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.